The Project Gutenberg EBook of Our Domestic Birds, by John H. Robinson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Our Domestic Birds

Author: John H. Robinson

Release Date: November 22, 2010 [EBook #34376]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OUR DOMESTIC BIRDS ***




Produced by Peter Vachuska, Stephen H. Sentoff, Chuck Greif
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net







[Illustration: HOUDAN CHICKS WITH BARRED PLYMOUTH ROCK MOTHER.
(Photograph by C. E. Petersen)]




OUR DOMESTIC BIRDS


ELEMENTARY LESSONS
IN AVICULTURE


BY
JOHN H. ROBINSON


GINN AND COMPANY
BOSTON · NEW YORK · CHICAGO · LONDON




COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY
JOHN H. ROBINSON

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

413.9


=The Athenæum Press=
GINN AND COMPANY · PROPRIETORS · BOSTON · U.S.A.




PREFACE


Ten years ago aviculture had hardly been thought of as a school subject.
To-day it is taught in thousands of schools, and in some states
instruction in poultry culture is required by law. This rapid change in
sentiment and situation has resulted from a combination of causes. When
agricultural colleges established poultry departments, it was found that
a large part of those applying for admission to them had neither the
practical knowledge of poultry nor the general education that they
needed to do work of college grade. About this time also the interest in
nature study began to take a more practical turn, and attention was
directed to the superiority of domesticated to wild animals and plants
as material for school studies of the phenomena of physical life. Added
to these special causes was a general cause more potent than either:
great numbers of people had reached the stage of experience in various
lines of aviculture where they realized keenly that a little sound
instruction in the subject in youth would have been of great value to
them later in life, saving them from costly mistakes. To these people it
seemed both natural and necessary that the schools should teach poultry
and pigeon culture.

Developing as the result of such a combination of causes, the demand for
an elementary textbook on poultry came with equal force from country
schools, where poultry might be kept on the school grounds as well as by
every pupil at home, from city schools, in which all instruction must be
by book, and from all types of schools and conditions of life between.
Had there been only the extreme classes of schools to consider, the
natural way to supply the demand would be with a special book for each
distinct type of school. The idea of one book for all schools, from
which each might use what seemed to suit its requirements, was dismissed
as impractical while so large a proportion of teachers were but slightly
acquainted with the subject. It is believed that the plan of making an
elementary reading course for general use, and a secondary book of a
more technical character for use where practice courses are given, is
the best solution of the problem under existing conditions.

In this first book the object is to tell in plain language the things
that every one ought to know about poultry, pigeons, and cage birds; to
teach fundamental facts in such a way that they will be fixed in the
mind; to excite interest in the subject where none existed; and to
direct enthusiasm along right lines. While the demand has been almost
wholly for a poultry book, pigeons and cage birds are included, because
they are of more interest than some kinds of poultry and better adapted
than any other kind to the conditions of city life.

In regard to the time that should be given to this course, one period a
week for forty weeks is better than a period a day for forty days,
because the average person, young or old, retains a great deal more of
what is read or heard about a diversified subject if the ground is
covered by easy stages with comparatively long intervals between.
References for collateral readings and suggestions for original
investigations are omitted, because, in the author's opinion, what work
of this kind it is desirable for a high-school pupil to do should be
done by those taking practice work in the advanced course.

                                        JOHN H. ROBINSON

READING, MASSACHUSETTS




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                                           PAGE

I. BIRDS AND THEIR RELATIONS TO MAN                                  1

    Definition of a bird; Place of birds in the animal kingdom;
    Flight of birds; Voices of birds; Social relations of
    birds--Place of birds in domestication--Uses of birds in
    domestication--Place of wild birds in civilization--Classes
    of domestic birds

II. CHARACTERS AND HABITS OF BIRDS RELATED TO USE                    8

    Feathers--Structure of feathers--Arrangement of the
    feathers--Decorative feather forms--Color in
    feathers--Growth and molting of feathers--Flight--Mechanism
    of the wing--Scratching--Swimming--Foods and mode of
    digestion--Peculiarities of birds' eggs--Development of the
    egg--Rate and amount of egg
    production--Incubation--Development of the embryo in a
    bird's egg

III. SPECIES AND THEIR DIVISIONS IN DOMESTIC BIRDS                  24

    Definition of species--Origin of species--Natural
    varieties--Varieties in domestication--Classification of
    domestic varieties of birds--Systematic mixtures of breeds
    and varieties--Pure-bred, thoroughbred, and standard-bred

IV. FOWLS                                                           31

    Description--Origin of the fowl--Appearance of the original
    wild species--Distribution of fowls in ancient
    times--Development of principal races of fowls--How fowls
    were kept in old times--Modern conditions and
    methods--Native fowls in America--Old European races of
    fowls--Italian fowls--English races of fowls--German and
    Dutch races--French races--Spanish races--Asiatic races of
    fowls--Chinese races--Japanese races--The "hen-fever"
    period--How the American breeds arose--The modern Barred
    Plymouth Rock--Other varieties of the Plymouth Rock--The
    Wyandottes--The Rhode Island Red--The American idea in
    England; the Orpington--Present distribution of improved
    races--Deformed and dwarf races--Silky fowls--Frizzled
    fowls--Rumpless fowls--Bantams--Origin of Bantams--Varieties
    of bantams

V. MANAGEMENT OF FOWLS                                              72

    Small flocks on town lots: Numbers in flocks--Houses and
    yards--Feeding--Growing chickens. Small flocks on ordinary
    farms: Numbers in flocks--Single houses for farm
    flocks--Feeding--Reproducing the flock--The hatching
    season--Broody hens--Setting the hens--Care of sitting
    hens--Attention at hatching time--Coops for broods--Feeding
    young chickens--Management of growing chicks. Large stocks
    on general farms: The colony system--Numbers of hens
    kept--Feeding, care, and results--How the chickens are
    grown--Adaptability of the colony system. Intensive poultry
    farms: Reasons for concentration--Concentration not
    profitable--Common type of intensive poultry farm. Broiler
    growing: The "broiler craze"--Present condition of broiler
    growing. Roaster growing: Description of a good
    roaster--General and special supplies--Large roaster plants.
    Intensive egg farming--Poultry fanciers' farms

VI. DUCKS                                                          124

    Description; Origin--The common duck--Improved
    races--Ornamental ducks--Place of ducks in domestication

VII. MANAGEMENT OF DUCKS                                           137

    Small flocks on town lots: Numbers--Houses and
    yards--Feeding--Laying habits. Growing ducklings. Small
    flocks on farms: General conditions--Feeding. Market duck
    farms: History--Description--Duck fanciers' methods

VIII. GEESE                                                        157

    Description--Origin--Common geese--Improved
    races--Ornamental varieties--The Canada Goose, or American
    Wild Goose--Place of geese in domestication

IX. MANAGEMENT OF GEESE                                            168

    Small farm flocks: Size of flock--Houses and
    yards--Feeding--Laying season and habits--Hatching and
    rearing goslings--Large flocks of geese on
    farms--Goose-fattening farms--Growing thoroughbred geese for
    exhibition--Growing a few geese on a town lot--Growing wild
    geese in captivity

X. TURKEYS                                                         179

    Description--Origin--Common turkeys--Improved
    varieties--Bronze Turkeys--Influence of the Bronze Turkey on
    other varieties--Other varieties of the turkey--Place of the
    turkey in domestication

XI. MANAGEMENT OF TURKEYS                                          190

    Size of flocks--Shelters and yards--Feeding--Breeding season
    and laying habits--Hatching and rearing

XII. GUINEAS                                                       201

    Description--Origin--Varieties--Place in
    domestication--Management of domestic guineas

XIII. PEAFOWLS                                                     206

    Description--Origin--Place in domestication--Management

XIV. PHEASANTS                                                     211

    Description--Origin--History in America--Species and
    varieties--Place in domestication--Management of pheasants
    in confinement

XV. SWANS                                                          222

    Description--Origin and history in domestication--Place in
    domestication--Management

XVI. OSTRICHES                                                     230

    Description--Origin and history in domestication--Place in
    domestication--Management
