The Project Gutenberg EBook of Woodcraft and Camping, by 
George Washington Sears (Nessmuk)

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Woodcraft and Camping

Author: George Washington Sears (Nessmuk)

Release Date: December 9, 2010 [EBook #34607]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WOODCRAFT AND CAMPING ***




Produced by David Clarke, Martin Mayer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







    [Transcriber's note: Italics rendered as: _italics_.]




 WOODCRAFT
 AND CAMPING

 _by_
 "_Nessmuk_"

 [Illustration]

 DOVER PUBLICATIONS, INC.
 NEW YORK




 This Dover edition, first published in 1963, is a
 slightly abridged and edited republication of the
 work published by Forest and Stream Publishing
 Company, New York, in 1920 under the title _Woodcraft_.

 _International Standard Book Number: 0-486-21145-2
 Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 63-21680_

 Manufactured in the United States of America
 Dover Publications, Inc.
 31 East 2nd Street, Mineola, N.Y. 11501




Preface


_Woodcraft_ is dedicated to the Grand Army of "Outers," as a pocket
volume of reference on--woodcraft.

      For brick and mortar breed filth and crime,
    With a pulse of evil that throbs and beats;
      And men are withered before their prime
    By the curse paved in with the lanes and streets.

      And lungs are poisoned and shoulders bowed,
    In the smothering reek of mill and mine;
      And death stalks in on the struggling crowd--
    But he shuns the shadow of oak and pine.

                                            NESSMUK.




Contents


  CHAPTER I                                                            1

  Overwork and Recreation--Outing and Outers--How to Do It,
  and Why They Miss It

  CHAPTER II                                                           6

  Knapsack, Hatchet, Knives, Tinware, Rods, Fishing Tackle,
  Ditty-Bag

  CHAPTER III                                                         13

  Getting Lost--Camping Out--Roughing It or Smoothing
  It--Insects--Camps, and How to Make Them

  CHAPTER IV                                                          28

  Camp-Fires and Their Importance--The Wasteful, Wrong
  Way They Are Usually Made, and the Right Way to Make
  Them

  CHAPTER V                                                           35

  Fishing, With and Without Flies--Some Tackle and Lures--Discursive
  Remarks on the Gentle Art--The Headlight--Frogging

  CHAPTER VI                                                          49

  Camp Cooking--How It Is Usually Done, with a Few Simple
  Hints on Plain Cooking--Cooking Fire and Out-Door Range

  CHAPTER VII                                                         62

  More Hints on Cooking, with Some Simple Receipts--Bread,
  Coffee, Potatoes, Soup, Stews, Beans, Fish, Meat, Venison

  CHAPTER VIII                                                        77

  A Ten Days' Trip in the Wilderness--Going It Alone

  CHAPTER IX--CANOEING                                                87

  The Light Canoe and Double Blade--Various Canoes for Various
  Canoeists--Reasons for Preferring the Clinker-Built Cedar

  CHAPTER X                                                           95

  Odds and Ends--Where to go for an Outing--Why a Clinker?--Boughs
  and Browse

  INDEX                                                              103




Illustrations


                                            _Page_
  "Nessmuk"                         _Frontispiece_
  Knapsack and Ditty-Bag                         7
  Hatchet and Knives                             8
  Indian Camp                                   19
  Shanty-Tent and Camp-Fire                     24
  Shanty-Tent Spread Out                        26
  Camp-Fire as it Should Be Made                33
  Frog Bait                                     41
  Three-Hook Gang                               41
  G. W. Hatchet                                 56
  Out-Door Cooking-Range                        58




Chapter I

     OVERWORK AND RECREATION--OUTING AND OUTERS HOW TO DO IT, AND
     WHY THEY MISS IT


It does not need that Herbert Spencer should cross the ocean to tell us
that we are an overworked nation; that our hair turns gray ten years
earlier than the Englishman's; or, "that we have had somewhat too much
of the gospel of work," and, "it is time to preach the gospel of
relaxation." It is all true. But we work harder, accomplish more in a
given time, and last quite as long as slower races. As to the gray
hair--perhaps gray hair is better than none; and it is a fact that the
average Briton becomes bald as early as the American turns gray. There
is, however, a sad significance in his words when he says: "In every
circle I have met men who had themselves suffered from nervous collapse
due to stress of business, or named friends who had either killed
themselves by overwork, or had been permanently incapacitated, or had
wasted long periods in endeavors to recover health." Too true. And it is
the constant strain, without let-up or relaxation, that, in nine cases
out of ten, snaps the cord and ends in what the doctors call "nervous
prostration"--something akin to paralysis--from which the sufferer
seldom wholly recovers.

Mr. Spencer quotes that quaint old chronicler, Froissart, as saying,
"The English take their pleasures sadly, after their fashion"; and
thinks if he lived now, he would say of Americans, "they take their
pleasures hurriedly, after their fashion." Perhaps.

It is an age of hurry and worry. Anything slower than steam is apt to
"get left." Fortunes are quickly made and freely spent. Nearly all
busy, hard-worked Americans have an intuitive sense of the need that
exists for at least one period of rest and relaxation during each year,
and all--or nearly all--are willing to pay liberally, too liberally in
fact, for anything that conduces to rest, recreation and sport. I am
sorry to say that we mostly get swindled. As an average, the summer
outer who goes to forest, lake or stream for health and sport, gets
about ten cents' worth for a dollar of outlay. A majority will admit--to
themselves at least--that after a month's vacation, they return to work
with an inward consciousness of being somewhat disappointed--and beaten.
We are free with our money when we have it. We are known throughout the
civilized world for our lavishness in paying for our pleasures; but it
humiliates us to know we have been beaten, and this is what the most of
us know at the end of a summer vacation. To the man of millions it makes
little difference. He is able to pay liberally for boats, buckboards and
"body service," if he chooses to spend a summer in the North Woods. He
has no need to study the questions of lightness and economy in a forest
and stream outing. Let his guides take care of him; and unto them and
the landlords he will give freely of his substance.

I do not write for him, and can do him little good. But there are
hundreds of thousands of practical, useful men, many of them far from
being rich; mechanics, artists, writers, merchants, clerks, business
men--workers, so to speak--who sorely need and well deserve a season of
rest and relaxation at least once a year. To these, and for these, I
write.

Perhaps more than fifty years of devotion to "woodcraft" may enable me
to give a few useful hints and suggestions to those whose dreams, during
the close season of work, are of camp-life by flood, field and forest.

I have found that nearly all who have a real love of nature and
out-of-door camp-life, spend a good deal of time and talk in planning
future trips, or discussing the trips and pleasures gone by, but still
dear to memory.

    When the mountain streams are frozen and the Nor'land winds are out;

when the winter winds are drifting the bitter sleet and snow; when
winter rains are making out-of-door life unendurable; when season,
weather and law combine to make it "close time" for beast, bird and man,
it is well that a few congenial spirits should, at some favorite
trysting place, gather around the glowing stove and exchange yarns,
opinions and experiences. Perhaps no two will exactly agree on the best
ground for an outing, on the flies, rods, reels, guns, etc., or half a
dozen other points that may be discussed. But one thing all admit. Each
and every one has gone to his chosen ground with too much impedimenta,
too much duffle; and nearly all have used boats at least twice as heavy
as they need to have been. The temptation to buy this or that bit of
indispensable camp-kit has been too strong, and we have gone to the
blessed woods, handicapped with a load fit for a pack-mule. This is not
how to do it.

Go light; the lighter the better, so that you have the simplest material
for health, comfort and enjoyment.

Of course, if you intend to have a permanent camp, and can reach it by
boat or wagon, lightness is not so important, though even in that case
it is well to guard against taking a lot of stuff that is likely to
prove of more weight than worth--only to leave it behind when you come
out.

[Sidenote: Clothing]

As to clothing for the woods, a good deal of nonsense has been written
about "strong, coarse woolen clothes." You do not want coarse woolen
clothes. Fine woolen cassimere of medium thickness for coat, vest and
pantaloons, with no cotton lining. Color, slate gray or dead-leaf
(either is good). Two soft, thick woolen shirts; two pairs of fine, but
substantial, woolen drawers; two pairs of strong woolen socks or
stockings; these are what you need, and all you need in the way of
clothing for the woods, excepting hat and boots, or gaiters. Boots are
best--providing you do not let yourself be inveigled into wearing a pair
of long-legged heavy boots with thick soles, as has been often advised
by writers who knew no better. Heavy, long-legged boots are a weary,
tiresome incumbrance on a hard tramp through rough woods. Even moccasins
are better. Gaiters, all sorts of high shoes, in fact, are too
bothersome about fastening and unfastening. Light boots are best. Not
thin, unserviceable affairs, but light as to actual weight. The
following hints will give an idea for the best foot-gear for the woods;
let them be single soled, single backs and single fronts, except light,
short foot-linings. Back of solid "country kip"; fronts of substantial
French calf; heel one inch high, with steel nails; countered outside;
straps narrow, of fine French calf put on "astraddle," and set down to
the top of the back. The out-sole stout, Spanish oak, and pegged rather
than sewed, although either is good. They will weigh considerably less
than half as much as the clumsy, costly boots usually recommended for
the woods; and the added comfort must be tested to be understood.

The hat should be fine, soft felt with moderately low crown and wide
brim; color to match the clothing.

The proper covering for head and feet is no slight affair, and will be
found worth some attention. Be careful that the boots are not too tight,
or the hat too loose. The above rig will give the tourist one shirt, one
pair of drawers and a pair of socks to carry as extra clothing. A soft,
warm blanket-bag, open at the ends, and just long enough to cover the
sleeper, with an oblong square of water-proofed cotton cloth 6×8 feet,
will give warmth and shelter by night and will weigh together five or
six pounds. This, with the extra clothing, will make about eight pounds
of dry goods to pack over carries, which is enough. Probably, also, it
will be found little enough for comfort.

During a canoe cruise across the Northern Wilderness in the late summer,
I met many parties at different points in the woods, and the amount of
unnecessary duffle with which they encumbered themselves was simply
appalling. Why a shrewd business man, who goes through with a guide and
makes a forest hotel his camping ground nearly every night, should
handicap himself with a five-peck pack basket full of gray woolen and
gum blankets, extra clothing, pots, pans, and kettles, with a 9-pound
10-bore, and two rods--yes, and an extra pair of heavy boots hanging
astride of the gun--well, it is one of the things I shall never
understand. My own load, including canoe, extra clothing, blanket-bag,
two days' rations, pocket-axe, rod and knapsack, never exceeded 26
pounds; and I went prepared to camp out any and every night.

[Sidenote: Preparations]

People who contemplate an outing in the woods are pretty apt to commence
preparations a long way ahead, and to pick up many trifling articles
that suggest themselves as useful and handy in camp; all well enough in
their way, but making at least a too heavy load. It is better to
commence by studying to ascertain just how light one can go through
without especial discomfort. A good plan is to think over the trip
during leisure hours, and make out a list of indispensable articles,
securing them beforehand, and have them stowed in handy fashion, so that
nothing needful may be missing just when and where it cannot be
procured. The list will be longer than one would think, but need not be
cumbersome or heavy. As I am usually credited with making a cruise or a
long woods tramp with exceptionally light duffle, I will give a list of
the articles I take along--going on foot over carries or through the
woods.




Chapter II

     KNAPSACK, HATCHET, KNIVES, TINWARE, RODS, FISHING TACKLE,
     DITTY-BAG

